Another place where we use this mood tense is when we are giving orders to each other, most of the time, with just one exception which we will look at, we're using this mood tense.
to give orders.
For example, if you wanted to say informally don't speak
You will just say you don't speak, but you will put it in this mood tense.
So how would you say that don't speak
No hables.
Good.
Don't speak.
No hables.
How would you say don't stay?
Don't stay, still speaking informally.
So you need to say you don't stay and then you just switch the ending.
So let's build it up together.
How do you say you don't stay
No te quedas.
So this is you don't stay.
But if you want to make this don't stay, then you will use this mood tense.
No te quedes.
And then it sounds like don't stay.
Don't stay here.
No te quedes aquí.
Good, no te quedes aquí.
The word for there is aí, aí, spelt
A-H-I and there also exists AI spelt with double L.
There's a tiny, even imperceivable difference between AI, A-H-I, and AI
A L I how would you say don't stay there informally?
No te quedes ay.
Good.
No te quedes aí.
Good
How would you say don't give it?
Speaking informally.
Don't give it.
No des.
No lo des.
Nolo des.
Don't give it to him
No lotes.
Now if you put a l, it's going to be for clarification purposes.
In which case it will be a repetition of something else.
No se lo des.
No se lo des good.
Don't give it to him.
What if you wanted to show, clarify, or emphasize that it's to him?
No se lo des a el good no se lo des a el What was to eat
Comer.
Now speaking to more than one person, how would you say eat?
How would you tell more than one person to eat?
Common.
Good.
So how would you say wait talking to more than one person?
Esperen.
Good.
Now if you want to say wait for me, we know already we don't use for, we just say me, meh.
With positive commands
with positive commands when you're telling somebody to do something rather than not to do something, we have these literal words like me or law.
breaking the rules that we learned so far about their position.
They will come after the changed verb only with positive commands.
This helps our ear tune in to the fact
that it's a command because other than that vowel changing which is a very small change which might be quite hard to pick up audibly
We also have these small little words like me or lo coming after the verb and that also helps our ear tune into the fact that it's a command.
So if you want to say to this more than one person, to this plural you, wait for me, await me, how will it sound?
Esperen me.
Good.
And it's written like one word as well.
Esperen me.
How would you say wait for it or wait for him?
Still to more than one person.
Esperenlo.
Wait for them.
Esperenlos.
But if you were to say don't wait for them, then we don't have it on the end.
This is a negative command.
So don't wait for them, steal to more than one person.
No los esperin.
Very good.
How would you say speaking formally eat?
Coma.
Comma.
Good.
Eat it
Komalo.
Good.
So we have the law on the end, but if you were to say don't eat it, still speaking formally
Nolo coma.
Good.
And speaking informally?
Nolo comas.
And speaking to more than one person?
Nolocoman.
But if we want you to say eat it, speaking to more than one person, positive command, eat it.
Common law.
Very good.
To forget was olvidar.
Olvidar.
Related to oblivion in English actually.
Oblivion means like a state of complete forgetting.
So we can see the connection there between oblivion and olvidar.
Olvidar to forget.
Or olvidarse.
Either.
It can be either because olvidar is a verb where we need to say what is being forgotten.
We need to say it.
So if we use it
We have no problem, lo olvido.
But if you want to just say I forget, then we have a problem because we're not saying what.
So we need to say I forget myself.
Me olvido
So it's a verb that doesn't like to be alone.
So how would you say forget it?
Speaking formally forget it
Olvidalo.
Good.
Now if you just want to say forget and we don't want to say it
This verb doesn't like to be alone.
So there we would say forget yourself.
So how would this be?
Still formally?
Very good.
Olvide se
How would you say don't forget it speaking informally?
Don't forget it.
No lo olvides.
Good.
But if we don't want to put the law, we can just say don't forget yourself.
Don't forget.
So how would that be?
No te olvides.
Good.
Note olvides.
Or we could do both.
We could say no te lo olvides.
We could put both.
No te lo olvides.
How would you say to more than one person?
Don't forget.
You guys, don't forget
No se olviden.
Good.
Don't forget it.
Still to plural.
No l'olviden.
Nololviden.
Good.
Or no se lolviden.
You could put the both.
Meaning doesn't really change.
How would you say let's not forget it?
How do you think that would be?
Let's not forget it.
No lo olvidemos.
Good.
But if you didn't want to say it and you just wanted to say let's not forget, how would you say it?
No nos olvidemos.
What was to buy?
Comprar.
How would you say to more than one person buy what?
Is missing what lacks what is necessary.
So what was this missing lacks necessary verb
Faltar.
Good.
So speaking to more than one person, buy what is uh missing, what is necessary, what lacks
Comprend keylo.
Lo que lo que compren lo que falta.
Good.
Comprend lo que falta.
You could also say, comprehend lo que hace falta.
Buy what is making luck.
You will hear that as well.
So we're using the mood tense to make commands with one exception.
The one exception is with positive informal commands
So what that means is when we're speaking informally and we're telling somebody to do something rather than not to do something
The reason why we don't use the mood tense here is because we want a shortcut.
It's what we do most to tell people informally what to do.
If you think about it all day you're saying wait here buy this culminator da da that and the other it's such common speech that it seemed a bit heavy to use the mood tense for this
So Spanish took a shortcut and the shortcut is just dropping the S of the U form of the verb.
So for example, we have comprar to buy.
U by informally is
Compras.
Now to make the order the positive order we just drop the S and we get
Compra.
Which is the same as the he she it.
It's the same as the he she it form, but it will never cause really any ambiguity for two reasons.
Firstly, your tone of voice when you're making an order, the context is always very present.
And also because we'll be putting our small words like la, me, la
after the verb with the positive orders at least.
So it's very obviously an order.
But we want to think it through this way that we are taking off the S so we keep the association with U informal.
So we have to buy compra.
You buy informally compras.
Then we want to make an order, we just get rid of the S and we say compra.
How would you say buy it, talking informally?
Compralo.
Buy me it.
Comprame lo.
Good.
What was to forget?
How would you say forget it talking informally?
Olvidar.
Good, but we need to say what we're forgetting with this one
Olvidalo.
And if we don't want to say the law we can say Olvidate.
Olvidate.
Good.
What was to eat?
Comer.
Let's say eat it informally.
Comelo.
Good.
But don't eat it still informally?
No lo come.
So it's just the positive commands that we have this shortcut.
When we go to negative, we want to use the mood tense.
Nolocomas.
Good.
How would you say eat it speaking formally?
Formally
Comalo.
Good.
Don't eat it.
Still formally.
Nolocoma.
Good.
Eat it speaking plurally to more than one person.
Eat it.
Common law.
Good.
Don't eat it.
Nolo common.
Nolo coman.
Very good.
What was to sell?
Vender Vendor Sell it speaking informally Vendelo Vendelo good but don't sell it
No lo ventas.
So our shortcut is dropping the S of the present for the positive commands which are informal.
It's something that's quite specific.
Positive commands informally, but it's something that we do all day and that should help us remember that we have this shortcut for it.
Kayar, C-A-L-L-A-R, Kayar, means to quiet and kayarse, kayarse means to shut up.
So how would you tell somebody to shut up informally?
Cayate.
Good.
Quiet.
Yourself.
Good.
So is it as polite as be quiet or as rude?
No, it's not very polite.
If you were to speak to more than one person, how would you say it?
Kayente.
Sorry, kayense.
Cayense.
Good.
Now we need the mood tense.
Kayense.
Very good